Lifehacking 101: slow down (#258)
mauroservienti/milestone.github.io: _posts/slow-down.md

---
layout: post
header_image: /img/posts/slow-down/header.jpg
title: "Lifehacking 101: slow down"
author: Mauro Servienti
synopsis: "We believe we're surrounded by people who accomplish many things, and we feel we do nothing. We struggle to keep up, and we achieve little to nothing. Why is that, and can we do something about it?"
tags:
- Time management
---

At the beginning of summer 2021, I had the pleasure to work remotely for a week from the friend's place pictured in the header of this article.

> One of the prominent beauties of the place is the private, 50 meters-long swimming pool the apartment complex has. We swam every day before lunch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
One of the prominent beauties of the place is the private, 50 meter-long swimming pool the apartment complex has. We swam every day before lunch.
```

One day, in between lengths, I complained a bit because I was tired. That day's training was more challenging than expected. 

My friend looked at me and asked: Why do you think we train? To train more tomorrow, and then more, and more, and so on indefinitely, he answered. There is no end goal. Just train more.

To some extent, it was enlightening.

Recently during one of my one-on-ones with Udi Dahan, the CEO of Particular Software, and yes, everyone has a quarterly one-on-one with Udi, we touched on something that later I connected to the discussion with my friend.

## Slow is Smooth. Smooth is Fast

With Udi, we discussed the "Slow is Smooth. Smooth is Fast" SEAL and Delta Force motto. The motto can be summarized as _you cannot go fast without first slowing down_. I quickly connected it to my swimming activities.

Swimming is an extraordinarily complex and challenging activity. Swimming fast comes with many subtle challenges. Technique is everything; it's much more important than strength. And probably the most difficult part is breathing.

> When swimming front crawl or butterfly for the sake of the sample, the breath pace is determined by strokes pace, and swimmers cannot breath when their body needs or at the rhythm they want. Usually, what happens to amateur swimmers when they start is that they try to swim faster by stroking faster. Stroking faster comes with breathing at a faster pace and with less time for each breath. Less time to breathe means less oxygen exchange which causes hypoxia that eventually leads to less effective muscles. The result is that they go slower instead of faster.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When swimming front crawl or butterfly for the sake of the sample, the breath pace is determined by the stroke pace, and swimmers cannot breath when their body needs it or at the rhythm they want. Usually, what happens to amateur swimmers when they start is that they try to swim faster by stroking faster. Stroking faster comes with breathing at a faster pace and with less time for each breath. Less time to breathe means less oxygen exchange which causes hypoxia that eventually leads to less effective muscles. The result is that they go slower instead of faster.
```

- After catching water, the next stage is pulling. In this case, a critical factor is the body angle needed to distribute strength between pectorals and back muscles properly.
- Then, how the stroke is finished is the next step, needed to squeeze out all possible energy from the previous pulling stage.
- Finally, getting elbows out of the water with hands nearly touching ears stretching over the surface.

Add to the complex mentioned stages the need to breathe and coordinate with leg movements crucial to strokes and breathing. Even if you never practiced front crawl, you probably got a good enough picture of the complexity.

Swimmers, especially beginners, need to slow down to concentrate on breathing and many other essential details. Only by slowing down can they focus on each step in isolation, on the required technique, and repeat the movements repeatedly until muscle memory kicks in. They become a natural part of the swimming style. At which point going faster becomes a secondary effect. Until you start focusing on legs, but that's another complex story.

## How can we swim the ocean of thousands of activities?

> Can we learn something from swimmers, and many other conceptually similar activities, to improve our efficiency? For example, if we believe we're achieving little to nothing, how can we go "faster"? What would a swimmer do?

Reviewer: Not sure if it's worth mentioning but practicing a difficult piano piece is the same thing. You start slow to work out the notes and fingering and dynamics until muscle memory kicks in, then you speed it up.
